# Online-Retail-Customers-RFM-Analysis
Analysis of purchase patterns and user segmentation of consumers of a UK based online retailer.

# Problem Statement
A UK based online retailer wants to look at its consumers more closely and understand their buying patterns to cater more effectively to them.

# Data set
The data has been obtained from [UCI Machine Learning Repository](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/online+retail).
This is a transnational data set which contains all the transactions occurring between 01/12/2010 and 09/12/2011 for a UK-based and registered non-store online retail.The company mainly sells unique all-occasion gifts. Many customers of the company are wholesalers.

# Approach
To help the retailer better understand its customers, the following procedures were performed:
1. Exploratory Analysis of Data- To understand how revenue is related to months and days. A better look at returned items, discounts etc.
2. Segmentation- Segmentation of the data has been performed on three factors- Recenecy, Frequency and Monetary Values.
3. Recency- An analysis of when was the last time a user made a purchase. The users were then split into 4 segments accordingly with the help of K-Means Clustering.
4. Frequency- An analysis of how frequent a user is in purchasing. The users were then split into 3 segments using Hierarchial Clustering.
5. Monetary- An analysis of revenue generated by each customer and then their segmentation into 4 groups based on the amount of revenue they contribute.

# Conclusion
The user base can be segmented into 4 clusters based on the Recenecy, Frequency and Monetary value of their purchase. This helps the store determine user purchase patterns like how long has it been since a user made a purchase, how frequent the user is as well how much does a user from a segment spend on an average.
Based on the segmentation, the store can optimize its marketing techniques and see which users are at the risk of becoming latent and which users need more attention. It can also help the store in managing inventory better by looking at purchase patterns, recency and frequency and analyzing when do users make most purchases as well as look at their highest paying consumers.
